[website] Q1 2021 Update (#25591)
mui-org/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/2021-q1-update.md

---
title: Q1 2021 Update
description: An update on our mission for Q1 2021.
date: 2021-04-12T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['oliviertassinari']
card: true
---

This update covers our progress over the last three months and what we aim to achieve in the coming months.

## Product

Here are the most significant improvements since December 2020.

### Design system

- 👩‍🎤 We have worked on rolling out and scaling the new **styling engine** to all the components.
  At this point, we have migrated 121 components out of 167 to emotion/styled-components.
  Most of the components left to be migrated are in the lab.
  We are almost done! You can subscribe to [material-ui#24405](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/24405) to be notified once finished.
  The community has been a valuable aid.

> - 📚 As a corollary to the migration of the components, we have worked on the migration of the **documentation**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 📚 To complement the migration of the components, we have worked on the migration of the code examples in the documentation,
```

>   We have favoured the `sx` prop anytime possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  favouring the `sx` prop where possible.
```

>   When the examples need to adapt to the provided props, we have used the `styled` API.

Reviewer: "need to adapt to the provided props"

What does this mean?

Author: ```suggestion
  When a component needs to render styles based on the provided props, we have used the `styled` API.
```

>   Effectively, `makeStyle` and `withStyles` have been removed from the demos (we will deprecate these API later on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Effectively, `makeStyle` and `withStyles` have been removed from the demos (we will deprecate these utilities later on).
```

  You can subscribe to [material-ui#16947](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/16947) to be notified once finished.

> - 📚 We have used the migration of the documentation as an opportunity to breakdown the demos into smaller **single-focused** ones, with inline previews.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 📚 We have used the update of the documentation as an opportunity to break down the demos into smaller **single-focus** ones, with inline previews.
```

  For instance:

  <img src="/static/blog/2021-q1-update/docs-before.png" alt="" style="width: 526px; margin-top: 16px;" />

  <p class="blog-description">Before</p>

>   was turned into multiple chunks, among:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  was turned into multiple chunks, among them:
```

  <img src="/static/blog/2021-q1-update/docs-after.png" alt="" style="width: 525px; margin-top: 16px;" />

  <p class="blog-description">After</p>

- 🥞 We have introduced a new `<Stack>` component.

>   The component handles one-dimensional layouts and is quite interesting to fill the CSS browser support for the flexbox `gap` CSS property ([no support](https://caniuse.com/flexbox-gap) in Safari).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It handles one-dimensional layouts and is quite useful to take advantage of browser support for the flexbox `gap` CSS property ([no support](https://caniuse.com/flexbox-gap) in Safari).
```

  The migration to the new style engine allows us to fully rely on dynamic styles.
  Developers can now do the following:

  ```jsx
  import { createMuiTheme, Button } from '@material-ui/core';

  // 1. Extend the theme.
  const theme = createMuiTheme({
    palette: {
      neutral: {
        main: '#5c6ac4',
      },
    },
  });

  // 2. Notify TypeScript about the new color in the palette
  declare module '@material-ui/core/styles' {
    interface Palette {
      neutral: Palette['primary'];
    }
    interface PaletteOptions {
      neutral: PaletteOptions['primary'];
    }
  }

  // 3. Profit
  <Button color="neutral"  />
  ```

  This new feature removes the need to create a wrapper component.

- 📍 We have synchronized the icons with the latest update of the Material Design icons.<br />
  Google has moved its icons to a new location: https://fonts.google.com/icons.
  At the same time, they have increased the number of provided icons from 6,500 to 8,500.
  You can find all these icons under the `@material-ui/icons` package.

- 🦴 We have migrated a couple of components to the `@material-ui/unstyled` package.

>   The package aims to host the unstyled and headless (hooks) components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The aim of the package is to host the unstyled and headless (hooks) components.
```

  So far, you can only find:

  - Backdrop
  - Badge
  - Focus trap
  - Modal
  - Slider

>   We are synchronizing the development of this package with the second theme effort (and not v5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We are synchronizing the development of this package with the creation of a second theme (and not v5).
```

> - 🛠 We added a subset of the system as flattened props to the CSS utilities components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🛠 We added a subset of the system as flattened props to the CSS utility components.
```

>   While we initially didn't plan to do such, we went backward, hearing the feedback of the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  While we initially didn't plan to do so, but reversed on hearing the feedback from the community.
```

>   Developers can now do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 In addition to using the `sx` prop, you can now do, for example:
```

  ```jsx
  <Typography p={2} color="text.secondary" />
  <Box display="grid" />
  <Stack mt={1} />
  <Grid color="success.main" />
  ```

  Note that with the other components, only the `sx` prop is available.

- ⚓️ We have introduced a new release line: `v4.x.x-deprecations.x`.

>   This release line is synchronized with the latest version of v4 and includes actionable deprecations to ease the migration to v5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This release line is kept in sync with the latest version of v4 and includes actionable deprecations to ease the migration to v5.
```

### Advanced components

> We have primarily focused on the data grid components. We have fixed a lot of bugs but also delivered new features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have primarily focused on the data grid components, fixing a lot of bugs ,but also delivering new features.
```

#### Date Picker

The date picker is at the border between the advanced components and the design system realms.

- 📚 We have fixed the generation of the API pages.

>   You can now find all the props supported by all the public pickers components, e.g. [DatePicker](https://next.material-ui.com/api/date-picker/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We now document all the props supported by the public pickers components, e.g. [DatePicker](https://next.material-ui.com/api/date-picker/).
```

> - ⚙️ We have mostly focused on addressing the technical debt present on the pickers components (ported from `@materal-ui/pickers`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⚙️ We have mostly focused on addressing the technical debt present in the picker components (ported from `@materal-ui/pickers`).
```

#### Data Grid

> - 🔄 We have started to bring the support for [lazy-loading](/components/data-grid/rows/#infinite-loading).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🔄 We have started to bring support for [lazy-loading](/components/data-grid/rows/#infinite-loading).
```

> - ⬇️ We have introduced the support for [CSV export](/components/data-grid/export/#csv-export).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⬇️ We have introduced support for [CSV export](/components/data-grid/export/#csv-export).
```

  <img src="/static/blog/2021-q1-update/csv-export.png" alt="" style="width: 523px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

- ♿️ We have fixed a couple of accessibility issues (more in progress).
- 🌏 We have introduced the support for [custom locales](/components/data-grid/localization/).

> - 🚨 We have started to work on breaking changes to reach a stable stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🚨 We have started to work on breaking changes to reach a stable state.
```

- 💾 We have extended the support of @material-ui/core to handle v4 and v5 at the same time.
  In the future, we might desynchronize the release version of _mui/material-ui_ and _mui/material-ui-x_.
  For Material-UI X, we will likely need to release breaking changes at a higher frequency: every six months.
- 🎛 We have added a column selector.

  <img src="/static/blog/2021-q1-update/column-selector.png" alt="" style="width: 518px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

### Design kits

#### Figma

> We have migrated all the components to leverage the [Figma variant](https://help.figma.com/hc/en-us/articles/360056440594-Create-and-use-variants) feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have migrated all the components to leverage the [Figma variants feature](https://help.figma.com/hc/en-us/articles/360056440594-Create-and-use-variants).
```

We have also taken this as an opportunity to polish the components:

> - Improve usage of auto-layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improve the use of auto-layout
```

- Fix theme design token usage
- Add the Autocomplete component

#### Adobe XD

We have made Adobe XD available with a first release.

#### Sketch

We have redesigned most of the components from scratch to make sure all components show their CSS properties using inspection tools such as [Sketch Cloud Inspect tool](https://www.sketch.com/blog/2020/01/29/introducing-cloud-inspector-free-developer-handoff-in-the-browser/).

## Company

### Handbook

The most important change inside the organization is the introduction of a company Handbook.

> The company is distributed and operates among different timezones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The company is distributed and operates across different timezones.
```

> Per the nature of our operation, and at the pace we are growing, we needed an effective and efficient way to share the organizing processes and culture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Per the nature of our operation, and at the pace we are growing, we needed an effective and efficient way to share the organizational processes and culture.
```

Per our transparency value, all the sections of the Handbook that don't contain sensitive information are [publicly available](https://www.notion.so/Handbook-f086d47e10794d5e839aef9dc67f324b).

> This Handbook is the single **source of truth**. It's meant to be updated by anyone, to say in sync with how we do things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Handbook is the single **source of truth**. It's meant to be updated by any team member, to stay in sync with how we do things.
```

### Growth between Q4 2020 and Q1 2021

- 📦 From 6.4M to 8.6M downloads per month on npm.<br />

>   It seems that React keeps taking market shares inside the frontend ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It seems that React keeps taking market share in the frontend ecosystem;
```

>   For instance, it's growing faster than Vue or Angular.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  it's growing faster than Vue or Angular.
```

>   All the indicators points to it: [StackOverflow questions](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/trends?tags=vue.js%2Creactjs%2Cangular), [stars](https://bestofjs.org/projects?sort=monthly), [downloads](https://npm-stat.com/charts.html?package=react-dom,@angular/core,vue), [Traffic on the documentation](https://www.similarweb.com/website/reactjs.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  All indicators point to it: [StackOverflow questions](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/trends?tags=vue.js%2Creactjs%2Cangular), [stars](https://bestofjs.org/projects?sort=monthly), [downloads](https://npm-stat.com/charts.html?package=react-dom,@angular/core,vue), [Traffic on the documentation](https://www.similarweb.com/website/reactjs.org).
```

>   Our strategy to focus on React only seems to pay off.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Our strategy to focus on React only seems to be paying off.
```

- ⭐️ From 63.8k to 67.2k stars, leave us yours [🌟](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui).

>   We have seen a significant influx of more stars than usual this quarter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We have seen a significant influx of stars this quarter.
```

- 👨‍👩‍👧‍👦 From 2,052 to 2,141 contributors on GitHub. We add on average one new contributor every day.

> - 💰 Grew gross monthly revenue by 68% (+4% weekly growth rate). We have never grown this fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Afraid of raising interest from the competition? You would prefer showing a lagging metric which is the headcount? My hope is that this figure helps to hire.

- 🏢 We have welcomed one new member to Material-UI: [Matheus](/blog/matheus-wichman-joining/).

## Our roadmap intent for Q2 2021

We'll do our best, no guarantee!

### Company

> We have signed with **four** new people to join the company this quarter (waiting for the notice period).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have signed with **four** new people to join the team this quarter (waiting for their notice period).
```

We will welcome our first designer and a frontend developer to collaborate with him on a second theme.
The two others will strengthen the design system and advanced components teams.

> We will cross the ten people milestone in the coming weeks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will cross the ten person milestone in the coming weeks.
```

> We have the following bjectives:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have the following objectives:
```

- Finish the implementation of the rebranding. A preview, the [about](https://next.material-ui.com/branding/about/) and [pricing](https://next.material-ui.com/branding/pricing/) pages.
- Onboard the new members and scale our processes as we double the size of the organization this quarter.

> ### Design system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Core components
```
We don't have a design system.

> - 🚀 Get v5 out! The development of this new version almost started a year ago. It's time to aim for the stable release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🚀 Get v5 out! The development of this new version started almost a year ago. It's time to aim for the stable release.
```

> - 📅 Start handling the issues reported by developers on the date picker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 📅 Start handling the issues with the date picker reported by developers.
```
